Extensions outside of document root for composer-based TYPO3 installations (#2237)
TYPO3-Documentation/TYPO3CMS-Reference-CoreApi: Documentation/ApiOverview/DirectoryStructure/Index.rst

..  include:: /Includes.rst.txt
..  index::
    ! Path
    see: Directory structure; Path
..  _directory-structure:

===================
Directory structure
===================

The structure below describes the directory structure in a typical
Composer-base TYPO3 installation. For the structure in a legacy installation
see :ref:`Legacy installations: Directory structure <legacy-directory-structure>`.

Also see :ref:`Environment` for further information, especially how to retrieve
the paths within PHP code.

.. _directory-project:

> Files on project level

Author: The new structure has a number of pros: We can link to headlines, not to table cells. We can produce hierarchical content-menüs (added) . We don't waste so much space on the left, expecially on small screens.

I added the complete paths as you suggested.

In my eyes they are sorted alphabetically (by main directory) This becomes also more clear now on using the complete paths.

I don't really like how the `:file` directive looks in headlines and content-menus, I will make a PR in our theme about that.

======================

On the top most level, the project level, you can find the files
:file:`composer.json` which contains requirements for the TYPO3 installation
and the :file:`composer.lock` which contains information about the concretely
installed versions of each package.

.. _directory-config:

:file:`config`
==============

TYPO3 configuration directory. This directory contains installation wide
configuration.

.. _directory-config-sites:

:file:`sites/`
--------------

The folder :file:`config/sites` contains subfolders for each
:ref:`site configuration <sitehandling>`.

.. _directory-local_packages:

> :file:`local_packages` (optional)

Author: Here we use "local_packages": https://docs.typo3.org/m/typo3/tutorial-sitepackage/main/en-us/ExtensionInstallation/Index.html

I kind of prefere this name because it makes clear that it is a local package not one installed from somewhere else, but I agree, we should call it the same all throughout the documentation

=================================

> Each web site which is run on TYPO3 **should** have a sitepackage, a special

Author: Its purpose is a special one. It does what a theme would do in other CMS. So it is confusing for newcommers that everything is an extension in TYPO3.

> Each web site which is run on TYPO3 **should** have a sitepackage, a special

Author: rephrased to make this more clear

and might contain publicly available files like a :file:`robots.txt` and
files needed for the server configuration like a :file:`.htaccess`.

If required this directory can be renamed by setting `extra > typo3/cms > web-dir`
in the composer.json, for example to :file:`web`:

..  code-block:: json
    :caption: composer.json

    {
        "extra": {
            "typo3/cms": {
                "web-dir": "web"
            }
        },
        "...": "..."
    }

.. _directory-public-_assets:

:file:`_assets/`
----------------

This directory includes symlinks to resources of extensions, as consequence
of this and further structure changes the folder :file:`typo3conf/ext/` is
not created or used anymore.
So all files like CSS, JavaScript, Icons, Fonts, Images, etc. of extensions
are not linked anymore directly to the extension folders but to the directory
:file:`_assets/`.

..  note::
    In TYPO3 v12 using the `typo3/cms-composer-installers` in version
    5 is mandatory. Therefore the publicly available files provided by
    extensions are now always stored in this directory.

.. _directory-public-fileadmin:

> :file:`fileadmin/`

Author: Never done that before, do we have a chapter where we could link for that?

    the system extensions are not located in this directory anymore. They can now
    be found in the :ref:`directory-vendor` folder.

.. _directory-public-typo3conf:

:file:`typo3conf/`
------------------

This directory contains the files :file:`LocalConfiguration.php` and
:file:`AdditionalConfiguration.php`. See chapter
:ref:`Configuration files <configuration-files>` for details.

..  versionchanged:: 12.0
    Starting with TYPO3 v12 (or v11 using the `typo3/cms-composer-installers` v4)
    the installed extensions are not located in the directory
    :file:`typo3conf/ext/` anymore. They can now be found in the :ref:`vendor`
    folder.

.. _directory-public-typo3temp:

:file:`typo3temp`
------------------

Directory for temporary files. It contains subdirectories (see below)
for temporary files of extensions and TYPO3 components.

.. _directory-public-typo3temp-assets:

:file:`assets`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Directory :file:`typo3temp/assets/` contains temporary files that should be
public available. This includes generated images and compressed css and
JavaScript files.

.. _directory-var:

:file:`var/`
============

> Directory for temporary files that contains private files (e.g. cached

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Directory for temporary files that contains private files (e.g.
```

> Fluid templates) and should not be publicly available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cache and logs files) and should not be publicly available.
```

See also :ref:`Environment-configuring-paths` for a more detailed description.

.. _directory-var-labels:

:file:`labels/`
---------------

> The directory :file:`var/labels/` for extension localisations. Contains all

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The directory :file:`var/labels/` is for extension localisations. It contains all
```

We should use full sentences.

..  include:: /Includes.rst.txt
..  index::
    ! Path
    see: Directory structure; Path
..  _directory-structure:

===================
Directory structure
===================

The structure below describes the directory structure in a typical

> Composer-base TYPO3 installation. For the structure in a legacy installation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Composer-based TYPO3 installation. For the structure in a legacy installation
```

Also, that this page is for Composer-based installations should be added to the heading: "Directory structure (Composer-based installations)" or something to make it clear. Not everyone reads the first sentence when he/she/it looks for a path, but the heading is more prominent.

see :ref:`Legacy installations: Directory structure <legacy-directory-structure>`.

Also see :ref:`Environment` for further information, especially how to retrieve
the paths within PHP code.

.. _directory-project:

Files on project level
======================

On the top most level, the project level, you can find the files
:file:`composer.json` which contains requirements for the TYPO3 installation
and the :file:`composer.lock` which contains information about the concretely
installed versions of each package.

Directories in a typical project
================================

.. contents::
   :local:

.. _directory-config:

:file:`config/`
---------------

TYPO3 configuration directory. This directory contains installation-wide
configuration.

.. _directory-config-sites:

:file:`config/sites/`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The folder :file:`config/sites` contains subfolders for each
:ref:`site configuration <sitehandling>`.

.. _directory-local_packages:

:file:`local_packages/`
-----------------------

Each web site which is run on TYPO3 **should** have a sitepackage, an

> extension with a special purpose containing all templates, styles, images

Reviewer: ```suggestion
extension with a special purpose containing all templates, styles, images,
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The directory :file:`var/labels/` is for extension localisations. It contains all
downloaded translation files.

This path can be retrieved from the Environment API, see :ref:`Environment-labels-path`.

.. _directory-vendor:

:file:`vendor/`
---------------

In this directory, which lies outside of the webroot, all extensions (system,
third party and local) are installed as composer packages.

The directory contains folders for each required vendor and inside each
vendor directory there is a folder for the composer name.

For example the system extension `core` has the complete composer name
`typo3/cms-core` and will therefore be installed into the directory
:file:`vendor/typo3/cms-core`. The extension `news`, composer name
`georgringer/news` will be installed into the folder
:file:`vendor/georgringer/news`.

Never put or symlink your extensions manually into this directory as they would
not be found. Local extensions and sitepackages should be kept in a separate
folder outside the web root, for example
:ref:`local_packages <directory-local_packages>`. This directory then be
defined as path in the repository section of the :file:`project/composer.json`.

> Upon installing it, it will be symlinked into the folder

Author: ```suggestion
Upon installation , Composer creates a symlink to 
```

> :ref:`local_packages <directory-local_packages>`. This directory then be
> defined as path in the repository section of the :file:`project/composer.json`.
> Upon installation , Composer creates a symlink to 

Author: ```suggestion
:ref:`local_packages <directory-local_packages>`. 
Upon installation , Composer creates a symlink from local_packages to 
```

> :file:`vendor/myvendor/my-extension` by Composer.

Author: ```suggestion
:file:`vendor/myvendor/my-extension`.
```

    :hidden:

    LegacyInstalations

.. _directory-vendor:

:file:`vendor/`
===============

In this directory, which lies outside of the webroot, all extensions (system,

> third party and local) are installed as composer packages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
third-party and local) are installed as Composer packages.
```

The directory contains folders for each required vendor and inside each

> vendor directory there is a folder for the composer name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
vendor directory there is a folder with the different project names.
```
There is no "composer name".

See: https://getcomposer.org/doc/01-basic-usage.md#package-names

For example the system extension `core` has the complete composer name
`typo3/cms-core` and will therefore be installed into the directory

> :file:`vendor/typo3/cms-core`. The extension `news`, composer name

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:file:`vendor/typo3/cms-core`. The extension `news`, package name
```

`georgringer/news` will be installed into the folder
:file:`vendor/georgringer/news`.

Never put or symlink your extensions manually into this directory as they would
not be found. Local extensions and sitepackages should be kept in a separate
folder outside the web root, for example

> :ref:`local_packages <directory-local_packages>`. This directory then be

Reviewer: This sentence sounds bumpy.
